README.md, before:

# Huequito

Jacobo de la Cuesta-Zuluaga. July 2025.

`Huequito` is the workflow for the base calling and genome assembly
of Oxford Nanopore reads of the Maier Lab. For base calling it uses 
the `dorado` case caller available [here](https://dorado-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
For genome assembly, it implements the `nf-core` pipeline `bacass` available
[here](https://nf-co.re/bacass/2.4.0).

The notebooks walk you through the download of the software, the
creation of files and the execution of the pipelines.

## Requirements for Running the Notebooks
### Jupyter Notebook
To successfully execute the notebooks in this repository, you 
will need to have Jupyter Notebook installed on your system. 
You can run Jupyter Notebooks in two ways:

* Using VSCode (Recommended): you can also run Jupyter Notebooks
    within Visual Studio Code, which provides a user-friendly 
    interface for working with notebooks. If you use this, make
    sure to install the `Remote - SSH` and `Jupyter` extensions

* Standalone Installation: You can install Jupyter Notebook 
    independently on your machine. This allows you to open 
    and run notebooks directly from your local environment.

### Conda
In addition to Jupyter Notebook, you will need to have the 
ability to create and manage Conda environments. Conda is a 
package and environment management system that allows you to 
install dependencies and manage different project environments
easily.

### IRkernel

To execute R notebooks, you must also have the IRkernel available
in the Conda environment you create to run the notebooks. 

## Why `Huequito`?
Huequito means small hole in Spanish. I know, it is not my best joke.

Commit message:

Add conda env creation, update README

README.md, after:

# Huequito

Jacobo de la Cuesta-Zuluaga. July 2025.

`Huequito` is the workflow for the base calling and genome assembly
of Oxford Nanopore reads of the Maier Lab. For base calling it uses 
the `dorado` case caller available [here](https://dorado-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
For genome assembly, it implements the `nf-core` pipeline `bacass` available
[here](https://nf-co.re/bacass/2.4.0).

The notebooks walk you through the download of the software, the
creation of files and the execution of the pipelines.

## Requirements for Running the Notebooks
### Jupyter Notebook
To successfully execute the notebooks in this repository, you 
will need to have Jupyter Notebook installed on your system. 
You can run Jupyter Notebooks in two ways:

* Using VSCode (Recommended): you can also run Jupyter Notebooks
    within Visual Studio Code, which provides a user-friendly 
    interface for working with notebooks. If you use this, make
    sure to install the `Remote - SSH` and `Jupyter` extensions

* Standalone Installation: You can install Jupyter Notebook 
    independently on your machine. This allows you to open 
    and run notebooks directly from your local environment.

### Conda
In addition to Jupyter Notebooks, you will need to have the 
ability to create and manage Conda environments. Conda is a 
package and environment management system that allows you to 
install dependencies and manage different project environments
easily.

If you are using this notebook on the M3 HPC you should have
the ability to create Conda environments. 

To create the VScode conda environment from the provided YAML file,
run the following command in your terminal:

```bash
conda env create -f envs/VScode.yaml
```

This command will set up a new environment with all the specified packages.
You only need to create the environment once.

To activate the environment after creation, use:

```bash
conda activate VScode
```

YAML files for other Conda environments necessary to execute the pipelines
are provided in the `/envs` folder. They are created and activated in a similar
way described above.


## Why `Huequito`?
Huequito means small hole in Spanish. I know, it is not my best joke.
